#Ethics Essay

A code of ethics is a set of guidelines that people abide by when they make decisions that involve the well-being of others. Usually this comes at an expense: Vehicle manufacturers could create cheaper cars at the expense of their safety. Architects and civil engineers could design bridges and buildings with less expensive materials, but the worth of human life is far greater than the price overhead. The government could reduce regulations for the emission of toxic gasses and fluids that come from manufacturing processes, but the ensuing problems would be far more impactful than the benefits of immediate monetary gain. 

In one of the classes I was required to take for my major, CprE 394, my classmates and I were tasked with discussing real-life issues that violated ethical guidelines such as the IEEE Code of Ethics. I discussed the Pinto issue, where members of the Ford Motor Company neglected important design decisions to speed the design process of the Pinto line of vehicles and knowingly ignored failing product tests, causing injury and death to many victims whose personal vehicles exploded in rear-end accidents. My classmates and I agreed that if the Ford Motor Company abided by the IEEE Code of Ethics under those circumstances, it would have (1) refused to manufacture and distribute Pinto vehicles after it failed rear-end collision tests, (2) released the hazards of driving Pinto vehicles at the expense of bad publicity, or (3) fixed the vehicles by recalling them despite the cost of repairs, thus violating IEEE 7.8.1: to hold paramount the safety, health, and welfare of the public, to strive to comply with ethical design and sustainable development practices, and to disclose promptly factors that might endanger the public or the environment and IEEE 7.8.9: to avoid injuring others, their property, reputation, or employment by false or malicious action.

Note that the IEEE Code of Ethics, like most rules and laws set in place, can possibly be broken without immediate consequence. Codes like these are meant to check a person’s attitude and value for other people’s lives, their well being, and their property. For a long time, Ford Motor Company broke the IEEE Code of Ethics without anyone discovering Ford’s secret. However, all actions have consequences. Lives were lost in the explosive destruction of several Pinto vehicles. Every day, thousands of tons of greenhouse gasses are emitted from devices throughout the earth, changing the climate. Large consumer electronics companies such as Facebook, Google, Amazon, and Nintendo request and store sensitive information, understanding the devastating consequences of a breach in their privacy. Ethical rules and regulations are particularly difficult to judge, requiring knowledge of a person’s motivation to perform certain actions, but they are a useful tool to remember the value of the well-being of clients, customers, users, and neighbors when making difficult ethical decisions.

With this in mind, how should I make ethical decisions in a professional environment? The best answer I’ve found is this: Do to others as you would have them do to you. This shifts my mindset from “What should I do to benefit me?” to “How can I benefit others?” At least three characteristics come from such a mindset:
 * Integrity: having strong morals and exercising good and ethical judgement. By establishing a pattern of selfless decisions, good character is recognized by others and trust is built. Ford Motor Company didn’t just lose money from the legal repercussions of lawsuits, they lost a good reputation as a company.
 * Honesty: truthfulness, sincerity, and openness. Honesty causes trust, a critical component of everything from friendships to business contracts. By omitting the secret of the Pinto from the general public, it leaked eventually, and people lost trust in Ford, along with all the cars with its logo on their grills.
 * Responsibility: accountability, dependability, and recognizing a personal and moral obligation to act for the good of others. By demonstrating responsibility for dealing with problems or circumstances, the burden of completing these tasks is lifted off of the shoulders of someone else. Ford shared information about the volatile nature of the Pinto, but it delegated the responsibility of finding a more safe vehicle to the owners of Pintos, likely causing anxiety and fear for them. 
 * Therefore, integrity, honesty, and responsibility come naturally by abiding by the rule mentioned above, creating trust in the people I interact with and removing burdens from them for their well-being. It also mitigates the severe risks that can come out of deception.
